---
figid: PMC11964952__gr4
figtitle: T1D targets for therapeutic interventions in immune cells
organisms:
- NA
organisms_ner:
- Homo sapiens
pmcid: PMC11964952
filename: gr4.jpg
figlink: /pmc/articles/PMC11964952/figure/F4/
number: F4
caption: 'T1D targets for therapeutic interventions in immune cells. Immune cells:
  (1) Anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) induces broad nonspecific immunosuppression that
  is primarily mediated through the recognition of a series of antigens expressed
  on human lymphohematopoietic cells, such as CD2, CD3, CD4, and CD8 expressed on
  T-cells, CD19 and CD20 expressed on B cells, and CD11b, CD80, and CD86 expressed
  on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). ATG achieves immunosuppression by eliminating
  lymphocytes in the recirculating pool through complement-mediated intravascular
  lysis, apoptosis, and antigen-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Low-dose ATG
  reduced HbA1c 2 years after therapy in recent-onset T1D patients. (2) Anti-CD3 monoclonal
  antibody (teplizumab) blockade of CD3 receptors in T-cells induces a state of anergy
  in certain T-cell populations, making them unresponsive to specific stimuli, and
  promoting regulatory T-cell functions. In recent-onset T1D patients, teplizumab
  was observed to preserve β-cell function and slow down C-peptide degradation. Costimulatory
  signal blockade in T-cells: (3) Abatacept is a CTLA-4/Fc fusion protein that prevents
  T-cell CD28 interaction with its CD80/86 ligand on APCs, thereby limiting immune
  system activation. Abatacept modified progression of T1D by significantly impacting
  CD4+ cell subsets, thereby delaying the decline of C-peptide and improving HbA1c
  in recent-onset T1D patients. (4) Alefacept is an anti-CD2 fusion protein that has
  a dual function, as it triggers PCD of activated memory T-cells and inhibits the
  interaction between leukocyte-function-associated antigen (LFA-3) and CD2, effectively
  preventing costimulatory signaling for the activation and proliferation of T-cells.
  In recent-onset T1D patients, 2 12-week courses of alefacept delayed C-peptide decline
  and depleted CD4+, CD8+ T-cells, and effector memory T-cells for over a year after
  cessation of therapy. (5) High expression of membrane-bound dipeptidyl peptidase-4
  (mDPP-4) is associated with the differentiation of T lymphocytes into Th1 (IL-2,
  interferon gamma) and Th17 (IL-6, IL-17, and IL-22) cells and upon activation of
  B cells. DPP-4 inhibitors (DPP-4i) disrupt the mDPP4-caveolin-1 nuclear factor kappa
  B (NFκB) activation pathway, which leads to a decrease in the expression of CD86
  on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and other monocytes. This limits the interaction
  between CD86 and CD28 on T-cells, resulting in a reduction in the proliferation
  and activation of antigen-specific T-cells. Additionally, DPP-4 inhibition prevents
  binding of mDPP-4 with adenosine deaminase (ADA) that would otherwise lead to the
  formation of a costimulatory CD3 signaling complex in CD4+ T-cells initiating CARMA-1
  signaling. Furthermore, DPP-4 inhibitors prevent activation of Th1 cells, thereby
  leading to decreased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines: IL-1β, interferon gamma,
  TNF-α, and IL-2 from Th1 cells. GLP-1: (6) Activated T-cells express a higher number
  of functional glucagon-like peptide-1 receptors (GLP-1R) in human CD4+ T-cells and
  GLP-1R activation by GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RA) in Treg cells leads to increased
  IL-10 expression and enhanced cellular inhibitory function. T regulatory cells (Treg
  cells): (7) DPP-4 inhibition in CD4+ T-cells is found to promote the function of
  Treg cells and the production of the immunosuppressive cytokine TGF-β. Immunosuppressive
  functions of Treg cells are facilitated through CTLA-4 ligand binding to CD80/86
  on APCs, expression of immunosuppressive cytokines: IL-10, TGF-beta and CD39-induced
  hydrolyzation of ATP to adenosine (ADO). Treg-derived ADO is a hydrolysis product
  of extracellular ATP cleaved in tandem by 2 Treg-associated ectonucleotidases, CD39
  and CD73. (8) Most naïve CD8+ T-cells and a small number of mature CD4+ and Treg
  cells express CD73 on their surface. Enzyme-active CD73 is released from the CD8+
  T-cell membrane upon activation, allowing Treg cell-driven ATP hydrolysis to occur,
  leading to adenosine formation. In immune cells, adenosine binds to the A2A receptor
  (A2aR), leading to the elevation of cAMP and interfering with the functions of activated
  T-cells and APCs, inhibiting their proliferation and cytokine production. IL-21:
  (9) IL-21 is produced primarily by CD4+ T-cells and is required for both Th17 cell
  differentiation and the generation of T follicular helper (Tfh) cells. IL-21 is
  the most prominent cytokine for the activation and differentiation of human B cells.
  IL-21 induces the differentiation of human naive and memory B cells into antibody-secreting
  plasma cells. Other cytokines, such as IL-4, greatly inhibit IL-21-driven plasma
  cell differentiation. IL-21 also directly regulates B-cell proliferation and apoptosis
  and can promote immunoglobulin production and isotype class switching. In addition,
  IL-21 signaling enhances the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T-cells and natural killer (NK)
  cells. A combination treatment of anti-IL-21 and GLP-1RA (liraglutide) preserved
  β-cell function in recent-onset T1D patients. This was demonstrated by a reduction
  in the concentration of C-peptide, as measured during a mixed-meal tolerance test
  (MMTT), from the baseline measurement to week 54 of treatment. B cells: (10) Anti-CD20
  mAb (rituximab) effectively depletes mature B cells by various mechanisms inducing
  cell death, including DNA fragmentation, complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC),
  and programmed cell death (PCD). CD20 is reported to regulate B-cell differentiation
  and growth as well as adjusting Ca2+ transport. Notably, CD20 is detectable in pre-B
  cells to mature B cells but is absent in antigen-producing plasma cells. GABA: (11)
  Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) has broad immune-modulating properties. It controls
  the release of cytokines from CD4+ T-cells and anti-CD3-stimulated peripheral blood
  mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Importantly, GABA suppresses the release of 47 cytokines
  in PBMCs from T1D patients and regulates pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine production
  in a concentration-dependent manner. Engagement of the GABAA receptor (GABAAR) induces
  depolarization of the membrane potential, leading to inhibition of T-cell responses.
  B cells secrete GABA, which then inhibits inflammatory cytokine production in CD8+
  T-cells and stimulates monocyte differentiation into IL-10-secreting immunosuppressive
  cells. Calcium blockade: (12) Lymphocyte calcium channel blockade may be an effective
  immunosuppressive strategy. Verapamil had a significant impact on T-cell activation
  by strongly inhibiting the expression of CD25 (which is typically present in Tregs),
  CD40L, and CD69. This inhibition is likely due to the failure of Ca2+-dependent
  transcription factors to activate gene transcription. Nuclear factor of activated
  T-cells (NFAT) is triggered by Ca2+, which also triggers the production of other
  transcription factors, including IRF4 and HIF-1α, that control the metabolic switch,
  cell cycle progression, and proliferation of activated human T-cells. Verapamil
  partially preserves β-cell function, as shown by C-peptide secretion in children
  and adolescents with recent-onset T1D. Proton pump inhibitors: (13) In immune cells,
  proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) suppress T-cell responses by decreasing the expression
  of the T-cell receptor (TCR)-activated membrane zinc transporter Zip8, thereby lowering
  the cytoplasm-free zinc (Zn) concentration. PPI-induced decrease in Zip8 expression
  increases transcription factor CREMα, which dramatically downregulates IL-2 production,
  while decreases in the transcription factor pCREB downregulates production of interferon
  gamma in lymphocytes. In monocytes, PPIs were found to reduce the production of
  several inflammatory cytokines: TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NFκB. Moreover, PPIs inhibit
  the activation of neutrophils and monocytes and deplete intracellular and extracellular
  neutrophil reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO). PPI with DPP-4i
  in recent-onset T1D patients did not achieve C-peptide preservation, but due to
  high safety, PPI and DPP-4i have been suggested to be used in combination with other
  drugs. Preliminary results show that a combination of GABA, DPP-4i, and PPI as an
  adjunct to insulin therapy improves glycemic control in patients with T1D and elevates
  C-peptide levels in recent-onset T1D patients. Beta-cells: Cytokine blockade. (A)
  During the progression of T1D macrophages and T-cells invade the islets and secrete
  proinflammatory cytokines. The combination of TNF-α and interferon gamma synergistically
  induces β-cell apoptosis through activation of JNK/SAPK, resulting in the production
  of reactive oxidative species (ROS) and loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential
  (ΔΨm). Proinflammatory cytokine blockade may act to prevent deleterious effects
  on β-cell survival and function in the islet microenvironment. Anti-inflammation
  and cytokine-modifying therapies showed varying degrees of effectiveness as TNF-α
  monoclonal antibodies (eg, Golimumab and Etanercept) postponed C-peptide loss in
  patients with recent-onset T1D. Canakinumab binds human IL-1β with high affinity
  and neutralizes its biological activity while Anakinra is an IL-1 receptor antagonist.
  Due to high safety, but insufficient efficacy in recent-onset T1D patients, canakinumab
  and anakinra have been suggested for IL-1β blockade as part of combination therapies.
  Verapamil + IGF-1: (B) Verapamil downregulates Ca2+ influx and thereby disrupts
  the formation of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TxNIP), reduces β-cell expression
  of IGF-binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) and thereby elevates IGF-1 induced signaling via
  increased IGF-1. (C) Stimulation of IGF-1R initiates PI3K/Akt signaling, which enables
  the activation of mTORC1. Upon activation mTORC1 phosphorylates the 4EBP1 protein,
  promoting cell growth, and the p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (S6K1), resulting
  in enhanced ribosomal biogenesis, mitochondrial biogenesis, and oxygen consumption.
  PI3K/Akt signaling also promotes β-cell-, but inhibits α-cell-related gene expression,
  as well as inhibiting β-cell apoptosis in the context of inflammatory cytokines
  and oxidative stress. Importantly, insulin receptor (IR) and IGF-1R are highly homologous
  and share PI3K/Akt and Ras/MAPK signaling pathways IR largely controls metabolism,
  whereas IGF-1R controls growth. (D) IGFBP-3 is a negative regulator of β-cell mass
  independent of IGF-1, which is a positive regulator. IGFBP-3 is a binding ligand
  to the death receptor TMEM219, which is widely expressed in islet β-cells. Bound
  TMEM219 triggers Caspase-8-mediated apoptosis of β-cells. (E) A 26-week course of
  a small tyrosine kinase inhibitor, imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, STI571) preserved
  β-cell function at 12 months in adults with recent-onset T1D. Imatinib acts as a
  β-cell protective drug, as it reduces ER stress and consequent β-cell apoptosis
  by inhibiting ABL kinase binding and hyperactivation of ER transmembrane kinase’s
  endoribonuclease (IRE1α RNase)'
papertitle: 'Disease-modifying pharmacological treatments of type 1 diabetes: Molecular
  mechanisms, target checkpoints, and possible combinatorial treatments'
reftext: Liudmila Kosheleva, et al. Pharmacol Rev. 2025 Mar;77(2).
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmr.2025.100044
journal_title: Pharmacological Reviews
journal_nlm_ta: Pharmacol Rev
publisher_name: American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
keywords: ''
automl_pathway: 0.8951951
figid_alias: PMC11964952__F4
figtype: Figure
redirect_from: /figures/PMC11964952__F4
ndex: ''
seo: CreativeWork
schema-jsonld:
  '@context': https://schema.org/
  '@id': https://pfocr.wikipathways.org/figures/PMC11964952__gr4.html
  '@type': Dataset
  description: 'T1D targets for therapeutic interventions in immune cells. Immune
    cells: (1) Anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) induces broad nonspecific immunosuppression
    that is primarily mediated through the recognition of a series of antigens expressed
    on human lymphohematopoietic cells, such as CD2, CD3, CD4, and CD8 expressed on
    T-cells, CD19 and CD20 expressed on B cells, and CD11b, CD80, and CD86 expressed
    on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). ATG achieves immunosuppression by eliminating
    lymphocytes in the recirculating pool through complement-mediated intravascular
    lysis, apoptosis, and antigen-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Low-dose ATG
    reduced HbA1c 2 years after therapy in recent-onset T1D patients. (2) Anti-CD3
    monoclonal antibody (teplizumab) blockade of CD3 receptors in T-cells induces
    a state of anergy in certain T-cell populations, making them unresponsive to specific
    stimuli, and promoting regulatory T-cell functions. In recent-onset T1D patients,
    teplizumab was observed to preserve β-cell function and slow down C-peptide degradation.
    Costimulatory signal blockade in T-cells: (3) Abatacept is a CTLA-4/Fc fusion
    protein that prevents T-cell CD28 interaction with its CD80/86 ligand on APCs,
    thereby limiting immune system activation. Abatacept modified progression of T1D
    by significantly impacting CD4+ cell subsets, thereby delaying the decline of
    C-peptide and improving HbA1c in recent-onset T1D patients. (4) Alefacept is an
    anti-CD2 fusion protein that has a dual function, as it triggers PCD of activated
    memory T-cells and inhibits the interaction between leukocyte-function-associated
    antigen (LFA-3) and CD2, effectively preventing costimulatory signaling for the
    activation and proliferation of T-cells. In recent-onset T1D patients, 2 12-week
    courses of alefacept delayed C-peptide decline and depleted CD4+, CD8+ T-cells,
    and effector memory T-cells for over a year after cessation of therapy. (5) High
    expression of membrane-bound dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (mDPP-4) is associated with
    the differentiation of T lymphocytes into Th1 (IL-2, interferon gamma) and Th17
    (IL-6, IL-17, and IL-22) cells and upon activation of B cells. DPP-4 inhibitors
    (DPP-4i) disrupt the mDPP4-caveolin-1 nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) activation
    pathway, which leads to a decrease in the expression of CD86 on antigen-presenting
    cells (APCs) and other monocytes. This limits the interaction between CD86 and
    CD28 on T-cells, resulting in a reduction in the proliferation and activation
    of antigen-specific T-cells. Additionally, DPP-4 inhibition prevents binding of
    mDPP-4 with adenosine deaminase (ADA) that would otherwise lead to the formation
    of a costimulatory CD3 signaling complex in CD4+ T-cells initiating CARMA-1 signaling.
    Furthermore, DPP-4 inhibitors prevent activation of Th1 cells, thereby leading
    to decreased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines: IL-1β, interferon gamma,
    TNF-α, and IL-2 from Th1 cells. GLP-1: (6) Activated T-cells express a higher
    number of functional glucagon-like peptide-1 receptors (GLP-1R) in human CD4+
    T-cells and GLP-1R activation by GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RA) in Treg cells
    leads to increased IL-10 expression and enhanced cellular inhibitory function.
    T regulatory cells (Treg cells): (7) DPP-4 inhibition in CD4+ T-cells is found
    to promote the function of Treg cells and the production of the immunosuppressive
    cytokine TGF-β. Immunosuppressive functions of Treg cells are facilitated through
    CTLA-4 ligand binding to CD80/86 on APCs, expression of immunosuppressive cytokines:
    IL-10, TGF-beta and CD39-induced hydrolyzation of ATP to adenosine (ADO). Treg-derived
    ADO is a hydrolysis product of extracellular ATP cleaved in tandem by 2 Treg-associated
    ectonucleotidases, CD39 and CD73. (8) Most naïve CD8+ T-cells and a small number
    of mature CD4+ and Treg cells express CD73 on their surface. Enzyme-active CD73
    is released from the CD8+ T-cell membrane upon activation, allowing Treg cell-driven
    ATP hydrolysis to occur, leading to adenosine formation. In immune cells, adenosine
    binds to the A2A receptor (A2aR), leading to the elevation of cAMP and interfering
    with the functions of activated T-cells and APCs, inhibiting their proliferation
    and cytokine production. IL-21: (9) IL-21 is produced primarily by CD4+ T-cells
    and is required for both Th17 cell differentiation and the generation of T follicular
    helper (Tfh) cells. IL-21 is the most prominent cytokine for the activation and
    differentiation of human B cells. IL-21 induces the differentiation of human naive
    and memory B cells into antibody-secreting plasma cells. Other cytokines, such
    as IL-4, greatly inhibit IL-21-driven plasma cell differentiation. IL-21 also
    directly regulates B-cell proliferation and apoptosis and can promote immunoglobulin
    production and isotype class switching. In addition, IL-21 signaling enhances
    the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T-cells and natural killer (NK) cells. A combination
    treatment of anti-IL-21 and GLP-1RA (liraglutide) preserved β-cell function in
    recent-onset T1D patients. This was demonstrated by a reduction in the concentration
    of C-peptide, as measured during a mixed-meal tolerance test (MMTT), from the
    baseline measurement to week 54 of treatment. B cells: (10) Anti-CD20 mAb (rituximab)
    effectively depletes mature B cells by various mechanisms inducing cell death,
    including DNA fragmentation, complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC), and programmed
    cell death (PCD). CD20 is reported to regulate B-cell differentiation and growth
    as well as adjusting Ca2+ transport. Notably, CD20 is detectable in pre-B cells
    to mature B cells but is absent in antigen-producing plasma cells. GABA: (11)
    Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) has broad immune-modulating properties. It controls
    the release of cytokines from CD4+ T-cells and anti-CD3-stimulated peripheral
    blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Importantly, GABA suppresses the release of 47
    cytokines in PBMCs from T1D patients and regulates pro- and anti-inflammatory
    cytokine production in a concentration-dependent manner. Engagement of the GABAA
    receptor (GABAAR) induces depolarization of the membrane potential, leading to
    inhibition of T-cell responses. B cells secrete GABA, which then inhibits inflammatory
    cytokine production in CD8+ T-cells and stimulates monocyte differentiation into
    IL-10-secreting immunosuppressive cells. Calcium blockade: (12) Lymphocyte calcium
    channel blockade may be an effective immunosuppressive strategy. Verapamil had
    a significant impact on T-cell activation by strongly inhibiting the expression
    of CD25 (which is typically present in Tregs), CD40L, and CD69. This inhibition
    is likely due to the failure of Ca2+-dependent transcription factors to activate
    gene transcription. Nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) is triggered by
    Ca2+, which also triggers the production of other transcription factors, including
    IRF4 and HIF-1α, that control the metabolic switch, cell cycle progression, and
    proliferation of activated human T-cells. Verapamil partially preserves β-cell
    function, as shown by C-peptide secretion in children and adolescents with recent-onset
    T1D. Proton pump inhibitors: (13) In immune cells, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
    suppress T-cell responses by decreasing the expression of the T-cell receptor
    (TCR)-activated membrane zinc transporter Zip8, thereby lowering the cytoplasm-free
    zinc (Zn) concentration. PPI-induced decrease in Zip8 expression increases transcription
    factor CREMα, which dramatically downregulates IL-2 production, while decreases
    in the transcription factor pCREB downregulates production of interferon gamma
    in lymphocytes. In monocytes, PPIs were found to reduce the production of several
    inflammatory cytokines: TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NFκB. Moreover, PPIs inhibit the
    activation of neutrophils and monocytes and deplete intracellular and extracellular
    neutrophil reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO). PPI with DPP-4i
    in recent-onset T1D patients did not achieve C-peptide preservation, but due to
    high safety, PPI and DPP-4i have been suggested to be used in combination with
    other drugs. Preliminary results show that a combination of GABA, DPP-4i, and
    PPI as an adjunct to insulin therapy improves glycemic control in patients with
    T1D and elevates C-peptide levels in recent-onset T1D patients. Beta-cells: Cytokine
    blockade. (A) During the progression of T1D macrophages and T-cells invade the
    islets and secrete proinflammatory cytokines. The combination of TNF-α and interferon
    gamma synergistically induces β-cell apoptosis through activation of JNK/SAPK,
    resulting in the production of reactive oxidative species (ROS) and loss of mitochondrial
    transmembrane potential (ΔΨm). Proinflammatory cytokine blockade may act to prevent
    deleterious effects on β-cell survival and function in the islet microenvironment.
    Anti-inflammation and cytokine-modifying therapies showed varying degrees of effectiveness
    as TNF-α monoclonal antibodies (eg, Golimumab and Etanercept) postponed C-peptide
    loss in patients with recent-onset T1D. Canakinumab binds human IL-1β with high
    affinity and neutralizes its biological activity while Anakinra is an IL-1 receptor
    antagonist. Due to high safety, but insufficient efficacy in recent-onset T1D
    patients, canakinumab and anakinra have been suggested for IL-1β blockade as part
    of combination therapies. Verapamil + IGF-1: (B) Verapamil downregulates Ca2+
    influx and thereby disrupts the formation of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TxNIP),
    reduces β-cell expression of IGF-binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) and thereby elevates
    IGF-1 induced signaling via increased IGF-1. (C) Stimulation of IGF-1R initiates
    PI3K/Akt signaling, which enables the activation of mTORC1. Upon activation mTORC1
    phosphorylates the 4EBP1 protein, promoting cell growth, and the p70 ribosomal
    protein S6 kinase (S6K1), resulting in enhanced ribosomal biogenesis, mitochondrial
    biogenesis, and oxygen consumption. PI3K/Akt signaling also promotes β-cell-,
    but inhibits α-cell-related gene expression, as well as inhibiting β-cell apoptosis
    in the context of inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress. Importantly, insulin
    receptor (IR) and IGF-1R are highly homologous and share PI3K/Akt and Ras/MAPK
    signaling pathways IR largely controls metabolism, whereas IGF-1R controls growth.
    (D) IGFBP-3 is a negative regulator of β-cell mass independent of IGF-1, which
    is a positive regulator. IGFBP-3 is a binding ligand to the death receptor TMEM219,
    which is widely expressed in islet β-cells. Bound TMEM219 triggers Caspase-8-mediated
    apoptosis of β-cells. (E) A 26-week course of a small tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
    imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, STI571) preserved β-cell function at 12 months in
    adults with recent-onset T1D. Imatinib acts as a β-cell protective drug, as it
    reduces ER stress and consequent β-cell apoptosis by inhibiting ABL kinase binding
    and hyperactivation of ER transmembrane kinase’s endoribonuclease (IRE1α RNase)'
  license: CC0
  name: CreativeWork
  creator:
    '@type': Organization
    name: WikiPathways
  keywords:
  - APC
  - PROC
  - ITGAM
  - CD86
  - CD19
  - MS4A1
  - KRT20
  - CD4
  - IL10
  - CD2
  - IL2
  - STAT4
  - TNF
  - CD8A
  - CD8B
  - CD80
  - CD58
  - NT5E
  - IFNA1
  - TRBV20OR9-2
  - TRA
  - TRB
  - TRD
  - TRG
  - AR
  - CD247
  - CD3D
  - CD3E
  - CD3G
  - ENTPD1
  - GLP1R
  - DPP4
  - CD28
  - PIK3CA
  - PIK3CB
  - PIK3CD
  - PIK3CG
  - PIK3R3
  - PIK3R4
  - PIK3R5
  - PIK3R6
  - PIK3R1
  - PIK3R2
  - ADO
  - ATP8A2
  - AKT1
  - AKT2
  - AKT3
  - IL13
  - CRMA
  - DAPK3
  - ZGPAT
  - NFKB1
  - RELA
  - RELB
  - REL
  - NFKB2
  - IL18
  - MAPK1
  - MAPK3
  - MAPK11
  - MAPK12
  - MAPK13
  - MAPK14
  - MAPK8
  - MAPK9
  - MAPK10
  - IL1A
  - IL1B
  - CREM
  - IL17A
  - IFNGR1
  - IL1R1
  - IRF4
  - IL21R
  - NFATC1
  - NFATC2
  - NFATC3
  - NFATC4
  - NFAT5
  - TXNIP
  - IGFBP3
  - IL2RA
  - ISG20
  - CD40LG
  - CD69
  - IFNG
  - IL6
  - LORICRIN
  - LOXL2
  - IGF1
  - MTOR
  - RPTOR
  - CISH
  - GPSM3
  - RPS6KB1
  - KRAS
  - HRAS
  - NRAS
  - ZHX2
  - ARAF
  - BRAF
  - RAF1
  - SGSM3
  - MAFA
  - KLRG1
  - TMEM219
  - ERN1
  - ABL1
  - MTTP
  - DSP-AS1
  - ABL2
  - DDX41
  - PTPRN
  - ADO
  - Etanercept
  - PPI
  - ROS
  - Insulin
  - Glutamate
  - GABA
  - Verapamil
  - Agonist
  - MAP
  - ABL
  - ICA
  - IAA
  - Imatinib
---
