---
figid: PMC4758546__10.1038_jcbfm.2015.116-fig1
figlink: /pmc/articles/PMC4758546/figure/fig1-jcbfm.2015.116/
number: F1
caption: 'Schematic representation of blood vessel structure and main endothelial
  functions. (A) EC and regulation of vascular tone. The regulation of vascular tone
  is obtained through the balanced production of vasodilators and vasoconstrictors
  in response to a variety of stimuli., The left side of (A) shows the main mechanisms
  involved in vasodilatation: Nitric oxide (NO) is the predominant mediator of normal
  vascular function and is generated from L-arginine through endothelial NO synthase
  (NOS). When released by the endothelium, NO diffuses in the vessel wall, to the
  vascular SMC, and activates guanylate cyclase causing SMC relaxation. Another endothelium-derived
  vasodilator is prostacyclin (PGI2), generated by cyclooxygenase (COX) and arachidonic
  acid metabolism. PGI2 activates adenylate cyclase with subsequent generation of
  cAMP and final relaxation of the underlying smooth muscle cells. NO and PGI2 have
  also important antiplatelet effects, as they limit aggregation; both of them are
  involved in the inhibition of coagulation, inflammation, and smooth muscle cells
  proliferation. The right side of (A) shows the main mechanisms involved in vasoconstriction.
  The main vasoconstrictive factor is Endothelin (ET), an endothelium-derived 21-amino-acid
  peptide (the ET family consists of three structurally related peptides, ET-1, ET-2,
  and ET-3). The product of ET transcription is prepro-ET, which is cleaved by a neutral
  endopeptidase to form the active precursor pro-ET. Pro-ET may be released from the
  non-luminal surface of the endothelial cells and converted to mature ET by the membrane-bound
  metalloproteinase endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE). The two ET receptors, both
  coupled to G proteins, are endothelin A (ETA) receptor, situated on the vascular
  SMC, and endothelin B (ETB) receptor, located on endothelial cells. Binding to ETA
  receptor stimulates phospholipase C initiating in turn events leading eventually
  to SMC contraction. The result of ET binding to ETB receptor on endothelial cells
  is the release of NO and PGI2, which opposes the vasoconstricting action of ET.
  ET also exert mitogenic activity on SMC (not shown in picture). Many factors stimulating
  ET synthesis, such as thrombin and angiotensin II, also cause the release of vasodilatator
  PG12 and/or NO, which oppose the vasoconstricting action of ET. (B) Endothelial
  cells and coagulation and fybrinolysis. The major antiplatelet agents secreted by
  endothelial cells are PGI2 and NO. In the quiescent state, endothelial cells maintain
  blood fluidity by promoting the activity of numerous anticoagulant pathways, the
  most important being the protein C/protein S pathway (PC/PS), which is initiated
  when thrombin interacts with the endothelial cell receptor thrombomodulin (TM),
  facilitating activation of protein C. Activated protein C (aPC) inactivates two
  cofactors essential for blood coagulation: factors VIIIa and Va. To be effective,
  protein C must form a complex with protein S, which is synthesized by endothelial
  cells. Complex formation between thrombin and thrombomodulin also prevents thrombin
  from being able to clot fibrinogen or to activate platelets. Moreover, the endothelial
  cell surface is rich in heparin-like glycosaminoglycans (HSPG) to which antithrombin
  (AT) is bound thus providing the main site for inactivation of active thrombin.
  Endothelial cells also synthesize tissue factor (TF) pathway inhibitor and participates
  in fibrinolysis by releasing tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) and urokinase,
  allowing the transformation of plasminogen into plasmin, which degrades thrombi
  by digesting fibrin network. t-PA is constitutively released while urokinase is
  only synthesized by activated endothelial cells. The natural inhibitor of t-PA,
  plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) is also constitutively secreted by
  endothelial cells. The balance of t-PA and PAI-1, which is normally in favor of
  PAI-1 is also altered by (continued) Figure 1. Continued. cytokines, again in a
  way that is procoagulant. After activation, the balance of endothelial properties
  can be tipped to favor platelet aggregation and clot formation through coordinate
  induction of procoagulant/prothrombotic factors and suppression of anticoagulant
  mechanisms. Operating in coordination, these changes can allow fibrin formation
  and platelet activation to proceed in an inflamed focus. At least two mediators
  released by activated endothelial cells favor platelet activation. The first one
  is the lipid mediator platelet-activating factor (PAF), synthesized by endothelial
  cells stimulated by thrombin, histamine, or cytokines. Most of the produced PAF
  remains membrane associated. PAF is a potent platelet activator and can promote
  platelet adhesion to endothelial cells. The second is the von Willebrand factor
  (vWF) of which endothelial cells are the major source. vWF is constitutively secreted
  into the plasma and the subendothelial matrix. It is also stored in high amount
  in intracellular Weibel–Palade bodies, which can be mobilized rapidly in response
  to agonists like thrombin. Endothelial cells do not normally express the primary
  trigger of the coagulation system, TF. However, when exposed to thrombin, cytokines,
  or lipopolysaccharides (LPS), endothelial cells synthesize and express TF at their
  surface. Once coagulation has been initiated, endothelial cells promote thrombi
  activation since the activity of factor Xa (generated by TF plus factor VII) is
  locally enhanced by promotion of binding with its cofactor Va at adjacent Xa and
  Va receptors on the endothelial cell surface. Thrombin is the main effector protease
  of the coagulation cascade. Factor Xa, activated by factor VIIa and TF, converts
  prothrombin into active thrombin. This protease converts circulating fibrinogen
  into fibrin monomer, which polymerizes to form fibrin, the fibrous matrix of blood
  clot. In endothelial cells, thrombin causes vWF release, the appearance of P-selectin
  at the plasma membrane, production of PAF and chemokines. Prothrombin fragment 1 + 2
  (F1 + 2) and thrombin–antithrombin (TAT) complexes may be measured to assess thrombin
  activation. Endothelial cells also change shape and show increased permeability.
  All together, these changes initiate a proinflammatory and procoagulation situation.
  Thrombin similarly activates platelets. (C) Endothelial cells, inflammation, repair,
  and remodeling. Endothelial factors involved in the phase of increased vascular
  permeability include NO, prostaglandins, and platelet activating factor (PAF). Endothelial
  cells are also the ‘gatekeepers’ of the cell recruitment in inflammation. (C) Left
  side depicts the main events involved in the recruitment of leukocytes from the
  circulation into the extravascular space, critical for inflammatory responses, and
  repair of tissue injury. Once activated, endothelial cells express adhesion molecules
  on their surfaces thus allowing the binding to reciprocal molecules on the surfaces
  of circulating leukocytes. Finally, chemotactic factors attract leukocytes along
  a chemical gradient to the site of injury. Adhesion molecules involved in leukocyte
  recruitment include four molecular families which are selectins, addressins, integrins,
  and immunoglobulins. P-selectin is preformed and stored within Weibel-Palade bodies
  of endothelial cells and α-granules of platelets, allowing the rapid transportation
  to the cell surface, upon stimulation and thus the rapid adhesive interaction between
  endothelial cells and leukocytes. E-selectin is not expressed on quiescent endothelial
  cell surfaces but is induced by inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines or bacterial
  LPS. L-selectin is mainly expressed on leukocytes. Vascular addressins are mucin-like
  glycoproteins expressed on the surface of endothelial cells as well as leukocytes.
  They possess sialyl-Lewis X, which binds the lectin domain of selectins. Their functions
  include regulation of localization of leukocytes and are involved in lymphocyte
  activation. Vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1), together with intercellular
  adhesion molecules 1 and 2 (ICAM-1, ICAM-2), are adhesion molecules belonging to
  the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily. Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1
  (PECAM-1) is a member of the Ig superfamily expressed on the surface, at intercellular
  junctions, of unstimulated endothelial cells, as well as on other types of cells
  including circulating leukocytes, which is important for the passage of leukocyte
  across the endothelium. The interaction between endothelial and leukocyte PECAM-1
  is fundamental for transmigration. The right side of (C) shows main mechanisms implicated
  in endothelial repair. Mediators of angiogenesis are growth factors, among which
  vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is the most specific for endothelium,
  cytokines, chemokines, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and extracellular matrix
  macromolecules, which may influence endothelial proliferation directly or indirectly
  by means of the stimulation and the production of other angiogenic factors. Circulating
  endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) are hematopoietic stem cells with limited pluripotent
  potential, mainly involved in formation of new vessels after ischemia and in repairing
  damaged endothelium. Circulating progenitors cells (CPCs) are more undifferentiated
  bone marrow-derived cells, involved in damaged brain repair. Circulating endothelial
  cells (CEC) are mature endothelial cells released from the intima after vascular
  damage. In pathologic conditions with endothelial dysfunction, the number of EPC
  and CPC is reduced, while CEC levels are increased. BM, basal membrane; EC, endothelial
  cells; ExM, extracellular matrix; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocytes; SMC, smooth
  muscle cells.'
pmcid: PMC4758546
papertitle: 'Circulating biologic markers of endothelial dysfunction in cerebral small
  vessel disease: A review.'
reftext: Anna Poggesi, et al. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016 Jan;36(1):72-94.
pmc_ranked_result_index: '235080'
pathway_score: 0.6018836
filename: 10.1038_jcbfm.2015.116-fig1.jpg
figtitle: Blood vessel structure and main endothelial functions
year: '2016'
organisms:
- Homo sapiens
ndex: feadcdea-de98-11ea-99da-0ac135e8bacf
annotations: []
seo: CreativeWork
schema-jsonld:
  '@context': https://schema.org/
  '@id': https://pfocr.wikipathways.org/figures/PMC4758546__10.1038_jcbfm.2015.116-fig1.html
  '@type': Dataset
  description: 'Schematic representation of blood vessel structure and main endothelial
    functions. (A) EC and regulation of vascular tone. The regulation of vascular
    tone is obtained through the balanced production of vasodilators and vasoconstrictors
    in response to a variety of stimuli., The left side of (A) shows the main mechanisms
    involved in vasodilatation: Nitric oxide (NO) is the predominant mediator of normal
    vascular function and is generated from L-arginine through endothelial NO synthase
    (NOS). When released by the endothelium, NO diffuses in the vessel wall, to the
    vascular SMC, and activates guanylate cyclase causing SMC relaxation. Another
    endothelium-derived vasodilator is prostacyclin (PGI2), generated by cyclooxygenase
    (COX) and arachidonic acid metabolism. PGI2 activates adenylate cyclase with subsequent
    generation of cAMP and final relaxation of the underlying smooth muscle cells.
    NO and PGI2 have also important antiplatelet effects, as they limit aggregation;
    both of them are involved in the inhibition of coagulation, inflammation, and
    smooth muscle cells proliferation. The right side of (A) shows the main mechanisms
    involved in vasoconstriction. The main vasoconstrictive factor is Endothelin (ET),
    an endothelium-derived 21-amino-acid peptide (the ET family consists of three
    structurally related peptides, ET-1, ET-2, and ET-3). The product of ET transcription
    is prepro-ET, which is cleaved by a neutral endopeptidase to form the active precursor
    pro-ET. Pro-ET may be released from the non-luminal surface of the endothelial
    cells and converted to mature ET by the membrane-bound metalloproteinase endothelin-converting
    enzyme (ECE). The two ET receptors, both coupled to G proteins, are endothelin
    A (ETA) receptor, situated on the vascular SMC, and endothelin B (ETB) receptor,
    located on endothelial cells. Binding to ETA receptor stimulates phospholipase
    C initiating in turn events leading eventually to SMC contraction. The result
    of ET binding to ETB receptor on endothelial cells is the release of NO and PGI2,
    which opposes the vasoconstricting action of ET. ET also exert mitogenic activity
    on SMC (not shown in picture). Many factors stimulating ET synthesis, such as
    thrombin and angiotensin II, also cause the release of vasodilatator PG12 and/or
    NO, which oppose the vasoconstricting action of ET. (B) Endothelial cells and
    coagulation and fybrinolysis. The major antiplatelet agents secreted by endothelial
    cells are PGI2 and NO. In the quiescent state, endothelial cells maintain blood
    fluidity by promoting the activity of numerous anticoagulant pathways, the most
    important being the protein C/protein S pathway (PC/PS), which is initiated when
    thrombin interacts with the endothelial cell receptor thrombomodulin (TM), facilitating
    activation of protein C. Activated protein C (aPC) inactivates two cofactors essential
    for blood coagulation: factors VIIIa and Va. To be effective, protein C must form
    a complex with protein S, which is synthesized by endothelial cells. Complex formation
    between thrombin and thrombomodulin also prevents thrombin from being able to
    clot fibrinogen or to activate platelets. Moreover, the endothelial cell surface
    is rich in heparin-like glycosaminoglycans (HSPG) to which antithrombin (AT) is
    bound thus providing the main site for inactivation of active thrombin. Endothelial
    cells also synthesize tissue factor (TF) pathway inhibitor and participates in
    fibrinolysis by releasing tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) and urokinase,
    allowing the transformation of plasminogen into plasmin, which degrades thrombi
    by digesting fibrin network. t-PA is constitutively released while urokinase is
    only synthesized by activated endothelial cells. The natural inhibitor of t-PA,
    plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) is also constitutively secreted
    by endothelial cells. The balance of t-PA and PAI-1, which is normally in favor
    of PAI-1 is also altered by (continued) Figure 1. Continued. cytokines, again
    in a way that is procoagulant. After activation, the balance of endothelial properties
    can be tipped to favor platelet aggregation and clot formation through coordinate
    induction of procoagulant/prothrombotic factors and suppression of anticoagulant
    mechanisms. Operating in coordination, these changes can allow fibrin formation
    and platelet activation to proceed in an inflamed focus. At least two mediators
    released by activated endothelial cells favor platelet activation. The first one
    is the lipid mediator platelet-activating factor (PAF), synthesized by endothelial
    cells stimulated by thrombin, histamine, or cytokines. Most of the produced PAF
    remains membrane associated. PAF is a potent platelet activator and can promote
    platelet adhesion to endothelial cells. The second is the von Willebrand factor
    (vWF) of which endothelial cells are the major source. vWF is constitutively secreted
    into the plasma and the subendothelial matrix. It is also stored in high amount
    in intracellular Weibel–Palade bodies, which can be mobilized rapidly in response
    to agonists like thrombin. Endothelial cells do not normally express the primary
    trigger of the coagulation system, TF. However, when exposed to thrombin, cytokines,
    or lipopolysaccharides (LPS), endothelial cells synthesize and express TF at their
    surface. Once coagulation has been initiated, endothelial cells promote thrombi
    activation since the activity of factor Xa (generated by TF plus factor VII) is
    locally enhanced by promotion of binding with its cofactor Va at adjacent Xa and
    Va receptors on the endothelial cell surface. Thrombin is the main effector protease
    of the coagulation cascade. Factor Xa, activated by factor VIIa and TF, converts
    prothrombin into active thrombin. This protease converts circulating fibrinogen
    into fibrin monomer, which polymerizes to form fibrin, the fibrous matrix of blood
    clot. In endothelial cells, thrombin causes vWF release, the appearance of P-selectin
    at the plasma membrane, production of PAF and chemokines. Prothrombin fragment
    1 + 2 (F1 + 2) and thrombin–antithrombin (TAT) complexes may be measured to assess
    thrombin activation. Endothelial cells also change shape and show increased permeability.
    All together, these changes initiate a proinflammatory and procoagulation situation.
    Thrombin similarly activates platelets. (C) Endothelial cells, inflammation, repair,
    and remodeling. Endothelial factors involved in the phase of increased vascular
    permeability include NO, prostaglandins, and platelet activating factor (PAF).
    Endothelial cells are also the ‘gatekeepers’ of the cell recruitment in inflammation.
    (C) Left side depicts the main events involved in the recruitment of leukocytes
    from the circulation into the extravascular space, critical for inflammatory responses,
    and repair of tissue injury. Once activated, endothelial cells express adhesion
    molecules on their surfaces thus allowing the binding to reciprocal molecules
    on the surfaces of circulating leukocytes. Finally, chemotactic factors attract
    leukocytes along a chemical gradient to the site of injury. Adhesion molecules
    involved in leukocyte recruitment include four molecular families which are selectins,
    addressins, integrins, and immunoglobulins. P-selectin is preformed and stored
    within Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells and α-granules of platelets,
    allowing the rapid transportation to the cell surface, upon stimulation and thus
    the rapid adhesive interaction between endothelial cells and leukocytes. E-selectin
    is not expressed on quiescent endothelial cell surfaces but is induced by inflammatory
    mediators, such as cytokines or bacterial LPS. L-selectin is mainly expressed
    on leukocytes. Vascular addressins are mucin-like glycoproteins expressed on the
    surface of endothelial cells as well as leukocytes. They possess sialyl-Lewis
    X, which binds the lectin domain of selectins. Their functions include regulation
    of localization of leukocytes and are involved in lymphocyte activation. Vascular
    cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1), together with intercellular adhesion molecules
    1 and 2 (ICAM-1, ICAM-2), are adhesion molecules belonging to the immunoglobulin
    (Ig) superfamily. Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) is a
    member of the Ig superfamily expressed on the surface, at intercellular junctions,
    of unstimulated endothelial cells, as well as on other types of cells including
    circulating leukocytes, which is important for the passage of leukocyte across
    the endothelium. The interaction between endothelial and leukocyte PECAM-1 is
    fundamental for transmigration. The right side of (C) shows main mechanisms implicated
    in endothelial repair. Mediators of angiogenesis are growth factors, among which
    vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is the most specific for endothelium,
    cytokines, chemokines, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and extracellular matrix
    macromolecules, which may influence endothelial proliferation directly or indirectly
    by means of the stimulation and the production of other angiogenic factors. Circulating
    endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) are hematopoietic stem cells with limited pluripotent
    potential, mainly involved in formation of new vessels after ischemia and in repairing
    damaged endothelium. Circulating progenitors cells (CPCs) are more undifferentiated
    bone marrow-derived cells, involved in damaged brain repair. Circulating endothelial
    cells (CEC) are mature endothelial cells released from the intima after vascular
    damage. In pathologic conditions with endothelial dysfunction, the number of EPC
    and CPC is reduced, while CEC levels are increased. BM, basal membrane; EC, endothelial
    cells; ExM, extracellular matrix; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocytes; SMC, smooth
    muscle cells.'
  license: CC0
  name: CreativeWork
  creator:
    '@type': Organization
    name: WikiPathways
  keywords:
  - ADH1A
  - ECE1
  - PLG
  - DYM
  - ADH4
  - VEGFD
  - PGF
  - VEGFB
  - ADHFE1
  - ADH1B
  - ADH1C
  - EDNRB
  - ADH7
  - PC
  - SDHD
  - SDC2
  - KRIT1
  - VEGFA
  - ADH5
  - VEGFC
  - NOS2
  - ADH6
  - NOS1
  - NOS3
  - Acetylcholine
  - Arachidonic acid
  - Bradykinin
  - Histamine
  - Serotonin
genes:
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH1A
  entrez: '124'
- word: ECE
  symbol: ECE
  source: hgnc_prev_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ECE1
  entrez: '1889'
- word: Plasmin
  symbol: PLG
  source: hgnc_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: PLG
  entrez: '5340'
- word: SMC
  symbol: SMC
  source: hgnc_alias_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: DYM
  entrez: '54808'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH4
  entrez: '127'
- word: VEGF
  symbol: VEGF
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: VEGFD
  entrez: '2277'
- word: VEGF
  symbol: VEGF
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: PGF
  entrez: '5228'
- word: VEGF
  symbol: VEGF
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: VEGFB
  entrez: '7423'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADHFE1
  entrez: '137872'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH1B
  entrez: '125'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH1C
  entrez: '126'
- word: ETB
  symbol: ETB
  source: hgnc_alias_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: EDNRB
  entrez: '1910'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH7
  entrez: '131'
- word: PC
  symbol: PC
  source: hgnc_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: PC
  entrez: '5091'
- word: 'PGl:'
  symbol: PGL
  source: hgnc_prev_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: SDHD
  entrez: '6392'
- word: HSPG
  symbol: HSPG
  source: hgnc_prev_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: SDC2
  entrez: '6383'
- word: V-CAM
  symbol: CAM
  source: hgnc_alias_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: KRIT1
  entrez: '889'
- word: VEGF
  symbol: VEGF
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: VEGFA
  entrez: '7422'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH5
  entrez: '128'
- word: VEGF
  symbol: VEGF
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: VEGFC
  entrez: '7424'
- word: NOS
  symbol: NOS
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: NOS2
  entrez: '4843'
- word: ADH
  symbol: ADH
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: ADH6
  entrez: '130'
- word: NOS
  symbol: NOS
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: NOS1
  entrez: '4842'
- word: NOS
  symbol: NOS
  source: bioentities_symbol
  hgnc_symbol: NOS3
  entrez: '4846'
chemicals:
- word: Acetylcholine
  source: MESH
  identifier: D000109
- word: Arachidonic acid
  source: MESH
  identifier: D001095
- word: Bradykinin
  source: MESH
  identifier: D001920
- word: Histamine
  source: MESH
  identifier: D006632
- word: Serotonin
  source: MESH
  identifier: D012701
diseases: []
figid_alias: PMC4758546__F1
redirect_from: /figures/PMC4758546__F1
figtype: Figure
---
